---
title: "An Analysis Of Culture Through Internal Memos"
date: 2024-06-21
draft: false
description: "a description"
tags: ["posts", "tag"]
summary: "An analysis of the culture of tech companies through an exploration of now exposed internal memos."
---

## My Searching for understanding culture
"Culture" in the tech space has an underhanded, and usually negative, connotation. Engineers talk of the cut throat culture of Amazon or the isolating culture of IBM. The secretive culture of Apple and the relaxed, shorts-wearing, culture of startups. In my search to better understand the software engineering industry, [I came across a collection of memos posted on a blog by Sriram Krishnan](https://sriramk.com/memos). It inspired me, and I spent the rest of the day peeking behind the curtain and putting my eyes where they weren't intended to be. It was eyeopening. I hope this analysis of two memos from the collection inspire you to read the rest. 

Internal memos are a form of communication within organizations that reveal the unfiltered culture and operational dynamics of tech companies. Unlike public statements, these documents are not intended for external consumption. There are not teams of people reviewing the contents before their release. Internal memos offer a candid look at a company's internal operations. This essay examines the way internal memos both mirror and impact the culture within tech companies, with a focus on two examples: a 1989 Microsoft memo about "zero deficit code" and a series of text messages between Mark Zuckerberg and Kevin Systrom during Facebook's acquisition of Instagram. These documents underscore the distinct, rapid, and innovation-focused environments of tech companies, and illustrate how these cultures both shape and are influenced by internal communications.

## What is an internal memo? 
Internal memos are documents that circulate within a company to communicate policies, strategies, and other important information among employees. They are often difficult to come by since they are intended for internal use only and are not subject to the scrutiny and polish of public relations teams. As a result, these memos can reveal the true culture of a company, unfiltered by external expectations and PR strategies. Internal memos are released to the public through various channels, often depending on the circumstances and the individuals involved. Whistleblowers or concerned employees might leak memos to the media to expose unethical practices. Legal processes, such as public records requests or court cases, can also bring these documents to light, and make them part of the public record. Sometimes, companies themselves may release memos to clarify their stance or to improve public perception during crises. Former employees might share memos in their writings or interviews to provide context for their experiences. Accidental releases often occur when documents are mishandled or incorrectly shared. 

## Zero Deficit Code

### [Follow this link to view the memo.](https://sriramk.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/zerodef.pdf)

June 20, 1989, Chris Mason, a software engineer at Microsoft, wrote a memo titled “Zero Deficit Code.” Mason outlines the need for, difficulties in achieving, and techniques for writing bug-free software. Despite its age, many of the ideas presented in the memo are still relevant in the industry today. The memo emphasizes thinking of the bigger picture, having good documentation, and facilitating effective communication—all of which are still key goals in software development. This memo was groundbreaking, and was quickly shared among managers and development leads inside Microsoft. 

The "Zero Defects'' memo is particularly interesting because it highlights the ambitious nature of Microsoft's culture at the time. The goal of zero defects in software is massive, reflecting a culture that values perfection and high standards. It was the accepted standard that code would come with bugs, and that it was the job of the QA team to find them. Mason challenges this. Arguing and emphasizing throughout the memo, “what we should be rewarding are people who do the job right the first time,“ (Mason). Mason is suggesting a culture switch. Using the internal memo as a bully pulpit, he speaks for Microsoft and declares they no longer stand for pushing buggy code to be done with it. Microsoft engineers should want to produce working software. Thirty years later, the principles outlined in the "Zero Defects'' memo continue to resonate within the tech industry. Despite advances in developer tools and methodologies, the aspiration for defect-free software remains a challenge. Mason’s call for a culture that values doing the job right the first time still echoes today, as companies strive for higher quality standards in increasingly complex software projects. While modern developer tools and frameworks have simplified many aspects of software development, the scale and complexity of applications have grown exponentially. This duality means that while individual tasks might be easier, the overall systems are much larger and more intricate, making Mason's emphasis on quality and thoroughness as relevant as ever. 

## Text Messages Between Zuckerberg and Systrom

### [Follow this link to view these text.](https://sriramk.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/zuck_systrom.pdf)

The second set of documents analyzed are the text message logs between Mark Zuckerberg, the founder of Facebook, and Kevin Systrom, the founder of Instagram, during Facebook's acquisition of Instagram. These texts have a very casual tone, despite the high-stakes nature of the billion-dollar deal being negotiated. The conversations are informal, showing the founders had frequent meetings at each other's houses and had relaxed dialogue that clouds the seriousness of the discussions. Despite this air of casualty, there is a more serious tone beneath the surface. It is obvious that each founder meticulously analyzes their messages before hitting send. 

These text messages between Zuckerberg and Systrom during Facebook's provide an unfiltered glimpse into the fast-paced and innovation-driven culture of tech companies. Unlike formal negotiations typically conducted in boardrooms, these messages reveal a casual yet intense dialogue, with meetings arranged at homes and discussions carried out in a straightforward manner. Both individuals walk a fine line. Despite the air of casualty, Zuckerberg is only thinking of the longevity of his company. While still appearing respectful and friendly on the surface, Zuckerberg is trying to get the best deal he can without scaring away Systrom. Zuckerberg's strategic vision for integrating Instagram into Facebook's ecosystem while maintaining its independence is laid out clearly, and Systrom's responses reflect his concerns about preserving Instagram's unique identity and user experience. This direct and open communication shows the speed and responsiveness that are necessary in the tech industry, where decisions can pivot quickly based on evolving discussions and immediate feedback. The candid nature of these texts also highlights the mutual respect and collaborative spirit that drive tech company cultures. Systrom’s thoughtful reflections on the potential integration and Zuckerberg’s emphasis on leveraging Facebook's infrastructure to enhance Instagram demonstrate a shared commitment to innovation and user-centric development. Despite the looming billion-dollar stakes, the dialogue between the two founders remains focused on strategic alignment and long-term vision rather than just financials. This approach not only facilitates effective decision-making but also fosters a culture where leaders are deeply engaged in the core mission of their companies.  

## Comparing and Contrasting
Both the Microsoft memo and the Facebook-Instagram texts serve as strategic documents, albeit in different ways. The Microsoft memo is highly focused on achieving a specific technical goal, advocating for a culture shift towards producing bug-free software and emphasizing the importance of quality and thoroughness. This document reflects Microsoft's ambition to elevate their technical standards and cultivate a disciplined engineering culture, where perfection and precision are the standard. On the other hand, the Facebook-Instagram texts, while broader in their strategic implications, showcase a more informal and relationship-driven approach to negotiation and decision-making. The casual tone of the exchanges between Zuckerberg and Systrom muddies the high stakes involved, highlighting a culture that values open communication, speed, and mutual respect. Despite these differences, both documents exemplify a top-down communication approach where leadership not only sets the vision and standards but also engages directly with key stakeholders to drive strategic initiatives. 

## Closing Arguments
Internal memos provide valuable insights into the cultural identities of tech companies, revealing a softer, less refined version of the company than the public typically sees. The Microsoft memo on "Zero Defects" illustrates a culture of high standards and precision, while the Facebook-Instagram text messages show a more informal, relationship-driven approach to business. These documents demonstrate how internal communications can both reflect and influence the unique cultures of tech companies, shaping the way they operate and evolve over time. By examining these internal communications, one can gain a deeper understanding of the intrinsic values and operational philosophies that drive these organizing, providing a window into their inner workings and culture.
